>> In the beginning,
there was nothing.
>> There was nothing.
>> All was darkness.
>> There was nothing at all--
>> Only the mother.
>> She was a Luna.
She was pure thought,
without form.
>> She was pure
thought without form.
>> She began to think.
>> The mother conceived
the world in the darkness.
the world in the dark--
>> The mother conceived
the world in the darkness.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> She conceived us as ideas--
>> She conceived us as--
>> As we think out a house
before we begin to make it.
[MUSIC AND TAPPING]
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> She spun the thread.
>> Creating us all in thought.
>> Creating us in thought.
And then came the light.
>> And then came--
>> And then came the light,
and the world was real.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[DRUMS PLAYING]
[WATER SPLASHING]
>> I first met Shibulata
when he was 50.
I was 48.
He's 70 now.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[OBJECTS BEING RUBBED TOGETHER]
Around 20,000 Kogi live
here in, the heartland.
They have no wheel, no writing,
and do not welcome strangers.
They believe their job is
to take care of the world.
Shibulata is called a mama.
It means enlightened.
He's training his daughter,
who uses the name Francisca.
[WATER RUNNING OVER ROCKS]
The mamas said
they wanted to work
with me because the
world is sick and dying,
and we have to understand that.
They decided to abandon
centuries of caution
and warn us.
I came to the Sierra Nevada
in 1988, Alan Ereira,
working for the BBC.
The mamas said they wanted
to send out a message.
>> I'm here, we all are
here to give a warning.
>> Animals die, the trees
dry up, people become ill.
Many new illnesses will appear.
There will be no cure
or medicine for them.
They say that we mutilate
the world because we do not
remember the great mother,
that unless we do something,
the world is coming to an end.
>> He has destroyed so much.
Does he see?
No.
Understand?
Start to understand, or what
will happen, right, that's it.
Then they waited, watched,
and listened to nature.
>> A major earthquake hit
Japan Friday afternoon.
>> A severe respiratory disease
called SARS has broken out.
>> Predicts searing
drought epic flood and--
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I'd stayed in touch for 20
years but not been summoned
before.
In the meantime, I'd retired.
I had no BBC
helicopter, and a Kogi
had learned to use a camera.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> They wanted to show our
scientists the way nature
interconnects.
So together, we
constructed a plan.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
[TELEPHONE RINGING]
>> Hello.
>> Oh, hello, this
is Alan Ereira.
>> Yes, hello there.
>> I'm phoning to confirm
our order for thread.
>> Right, OK, where will
you want to deliver it to?
>> This is something I need
to discuss with the Indians.
There is a real
possibility that they
may come to you to collect it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[OBJECTS RUBBING TOGETHER]
[CAR HORN]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> They call this
the civilized world.
It's a sort of joke.
Here, they have no address,
no document, no identity.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> They speak no Spanish,
have no signatures.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> To them, shoes would break
the connection between humans
and the Earth.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Without shoes you're not
allowed to board a plane.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I think we're going to need
400 kilometers of gold thread.
>> 400 kilometers
yes, OK, fair enough.
Is that a fairly precise amount?
>> There's no way of being
really precise about it,
is there?
I think the question is how
long is a piece of string.
>> Do come through and let
me show you the machine
that's made this gold thread,
which I've made for you here.
Now, the thread is made
by pushing a core yarn
through a pipe here.
And the wire laps
around it, and it runs
onto a reel at the bottom here.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> It all seems so
obvious to them.
Places are linked by a black
thread of invisible thought.
Gold is linked to Aluna.
It never decays.
But what's that to us?
We arranged a meeting with
a world-renowned astronomer
to see if the Kogi
picture of the universe
can make sense as science.
>> I'd like to begin by asking
the Kogi view of the world,
how large it is and its form.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Their picture of the universe
is never going to be yours.
>> No, because I have seen that
they couldn't possibly imagine.
>> But then what you talk about
the that the rest of the normal
human race can't imagine.
>> It's not that complicated.
>> Well, I hear the
words dark energy.
>> Ah, well, dark energy
is a recent discovery.
>> When you say dark energy,
what are you talking about?
>> It's a property, probably,
of space that we haven't yet
understood that makes
the universe accelerate.
And it's a mystery
at the moment.
>> But it fills all space?
>> It fills all space.
It could take another 100
years before we really finally
understand what's going on.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> And these nodes with the
material world and the darkness
is that right?
I'm trying to understand
whether the Kogi can grasp
the idea of learning
something new
from an instrument like
a telescope, the concept
of discovery.
>> I think that their notion
of acquiring knowledge is
the opposite of ours.
I think our notion is
that each generation knows
more than the one
before, and theirs
is that each generation knows
less than the one before.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Here he is in London
learning completely new that he
couldn't possibly have
imagined in his village.
Most people would say that
experience changes you,
maybe irreversibly.
But I don't get that
impression looking at the mama.
I get the impression
that he has a vision,
and his purpose is to
tell us that vision.
And that's why he's here.
What we see through
the telescope,
so this is a picture of
a small part of the sky.
And what we see is lots
of systems of stars
that we couldn't see
without the telescope.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> That's the star, yeah.
That's one-- that is
one star by itself.
Mama has found the one star in
this-- a single isolated star
in this picture straight away.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> That's right.
>> But we cannot see it.
>> Why couldn't we
learn from them?
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[HEART BEATING]
>> The mama set out to trace
a black line along the shore,
joining specific sights by
the mouths of the rivers.
These, they say, connect
directly with locations on the
and are where they
used to do their work
before the modern world
took over and changed.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> The sites may
have been destroyed,
but that's the point
of the journey.
The gold thread will be laid.
The hidden line
will be revealed.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
Esuama means place of authority.
The Kogi believe that's
how nature operates.
Esuamas is in the have direct
linkage to places on the shore.
The Kogi told me before
about token objects
they ex between the
mountain and the shore,
but I'd thought
this was symbolic.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Mixing the burned, crushed
shells with water produces
lime.
That makes a paste
in their mouths
that Kogi men say connects
them to the source of life.
That paste is
rubbed off the stick
onto the top of the sugui.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
[WAVES CRASHING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[HEART BEATING]
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[HEART BEATING]
[WAVES CRASHING]
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Why do they want Younger
Brother to see this?
What is the point?
What do you think
Younger Brother will--
how will this change
Younger Brother?
I don't understand it.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> I just can't see that what
happens to one specific site is
echoed in another miles away,
but the mamas say understanding
that is the key to
healing the world.
Dr. Camillo, you have
been working as a doctor
in the Sierra for many years.
You have got to know
the Kogi very well.
You've learned a
good deal about them.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Are there things that
you have seen a mama,
or mamas do that you have
thought only a mama could do
that?
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Jacinto, what is the
plan for today's filming?
What do you want to do?
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> I'm sure all this is
very interesting for you.
I thought that we
were making a--
we were trying-- the Kogi wanted
to explain that the world is
dying because of
our actions and they
wanted to make this plain
and clear at certain sites
along the black line.
So far, I have seen
nothing to indicate
that the world is suffering,
or the world is dying.
I have seen nothing
to indicate that what
happens at these places
on the black line
has anything to do with
the health of the world.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> I agree that it would be
a good idea for the mamas
to consult, and think more
about what they're doing,
and consider how they
communicate with us
because they need to show to
us that they actually do have
something to say.
To show that places on the coast
are connected to places higher
up and directly
affect them, we really
have to go up the mountain
and see the connection.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> The lakes that are found
high in the mountains--
>> High in the mountains--
>> Are linked to the sea.
>> Bubbles appear--
>> Bubbles appear in the
water, and the bubbles make
the connection.
>> The connection.
>> That is how we communicate
with the lakes and the sea
and with the mother.
The waters speak.
>> The waters speak.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> I'm sorry but the
bubbles don't speak to us.
We have to see the
connection within this one.
>> Jacinto,
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]..
What is our first possible
date for going up the mountain?
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Right, obviously,
we must cancel.
We can't take the risk of
going anywhere dangerous.
How long will it take him
to get up there, find things
out, and come back down again?
We dare not fly up the
mountain, even though we
have a helicopter for the day.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> The Indigenous tribes are
so alarmed that they walked
for days from communities on
the world's highest coastal
to reach this site on the shore.
Developers have dug a trench
to drain the lagoons here,
mangrove swamps
teeming with life.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[PEOPLE CHANTING AND SCREAMING]
>> The construction company says
that building a port here is
necessary for Colombia's growing
mining industry and will create
5,000 new jobs.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[WATER RUSHING AND WOMAN
SCREAMING]
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[HEART BEATING]
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
[MOTORCYCLE ENGINE]
[BIRDS CHIRPING]
>> Well, it's a beautiful
day down here on the coast
of Colombia.
And behind me there's the
snow visible on the peaks
of the Sierra Nevada.
And it seems that the gorillas
have melted away like snowmen.
The army is saying
that they'll fly us up.
The only problem is this
is the third day we've
been waiting for
the army helicopter
because the weather
has been lousy.
So our schedule's fallen apart.
We're not at all sure what
we're doing, or how we continue.
We hope that a helicopter
is going to turn up today.
It looks very good here,
but apparently, the weather
where the helicopter is
taking off from isn't so good.
So we'll see what happens.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[WAVES CRASHING]
>> With nothing else to do, the
mamas have time for a Caribbean
beach party.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[FIRE CRACKLING]
>> But they also
consult the bubbles.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[HEART BEATING]
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Mamas have restored
the forest upriver,
but at the estuaries,
professionals are in charge.
Germán, I would like you
to explain to the mama what
your view is of damage
to the river estuaries.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
[HELICOPTER BLADES WHIRRING]
[MUSIC PLAYING AND HEART
BEATING]
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
[OBJECTS RUBBING TOGETHER]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[FIRE CRACKLING]
>> Well, this is the third
night of our two day visit
to the esuama.
We're not quite sure
why we're still here.
We needed to move on,
and to do that, we needed
mules and a helicopter,
mules to carry
food and baggage
and a helicopter
to carry the camera equipment.
We got the mules.
We didn't get the helicopter,
and we don't know why.
We have satellite phones but
they're not really working.
All that we can do is
receive text messages.
Why does your phone
say it's 1728?
Have you noticed that?
And so far, we have had two.
We believe they come from
somewhere in the 21st century,
but they are a bit mysterious.
We got a text
message this morning,
which said that the helicopter
was about to take off.
That was at 8:30 this morning.
We waited, and
we're still waiting.
We'll see what happens tomorrow.
[RUSTLING AND CREAKING SOUNDS]
[HELICOPTER BLADES WHIRRING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[HELICOPTER ENGINE]
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[HELICOPTER BLADES WHIRRING]
[MUSIC PLAYING AND HEART
BEATING]
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> The Kogi say that damage
at the bottom of the rivers,
at the river mouths,
affects the system up here.
Do you believe that?
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> It was beginning
to fit together,
and we'd had some good news.
A world leader in marine
biology had actually arrived
on the coast to look at the
sights and meet the mamas.
>> Well, one of the things
that I'm very interested in is
the way in which the Kogi
view the natural world.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> The Kogi are talking in
quite a mystical way about
the connections between the
sea, the rivers, the lakes,
the land.
I can't see how that makes
sense to a scientist.
>> Well, it makes a
huge amount of sense,
particularly here on the
northern coast of Colombia.
The Kogi talk about threads
between these systems.
Effectively, those
systems really
are very strongly connected.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> All along this coast, the
development has disrupted
the flow of water from
the land towards the sea,
and this has caused big
problems in the whole area.
Because of the very high
evaporation caused by the heat,
you end up with very
large quantities
of salt in the ground, which
often kills the vegetation.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Along this stretch of
coastline in Colombia,
you almost have in microcosm
what is happening elsewhere
in the Caribbean, and also
elsewhere on the planet.
Their view that all these
activities are really
having a serious impact at a
larger scale are quite right.
[WAVES CRASHING]
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
[HEART BEATING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[HORN BLOWING]
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
[TRUCK BEEPING]
[ENGINE RUMBLING]
[MACHINERY MOVING AND ROCKS
FALLING]
[TRUCK BEEPING]
[HORN BLOWING]
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
[BIRD CHIRPING]
[WAVES LAPPING AT THE SHORE]
[SKYPE CALL RINGING]
>> Hello, Jonathan.
>> Hello, Alan, how are you?
>> OK, fine, we've just
managed to log on to Skype.
You can hear us?
>> Yes, we can hear you, and
please send my greetings from
the Zoological
Society of London.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> In conservation, we have
a problem because we tend
to conserve an area without much
thought to the special places
in a geological time scale.
So for species
there are areas that
are like a refuge, which
through geologic time
have been extremely important
for them to survive.
And on the short term,
we may remove these area
and there may be no big effect.
But in the long term,
through history, the species
can persist when those special
zones have disappeared.
So in many way we're looking
for much the same thing
is to understand where exactly
these special sites are.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> We have to better
understand connectivity.
And right now, we have a
very basic understanding
of how things interact
and affect each other.
And I believe that
this is essential
for our future
security to understand
these special sites to ensure
that they're conserved.
>> Jonathan.
>> Yes.
>> I want to try moving the
computer to another location
while we continue talking,
if that's all right,
see if it works any better.
Can you hear me all right?
>> I can hear you fine.
>> The connection
seems to be holding,
and when I turn the
computer around,
you may be able to see
the dolphins leaping,
which are paying attention
to this conversation,
taking some degree of interest.
>> Well, it's an important one.
>> It is very extraordinary to
hear that these kind of origin
sites that the Indians are
talking about make sense to you
as well.
This will come as a surprise--
certainly comes as a surprise
to me and I think will come as
a surprise to a lot of people.
>> I don't find it such a
surprise, really, though.
I mean, people
living with nature
understand a lot more
about it, obviously,
than a world that
has become much--
really disconnected from it.
Living with nature, you
realize that certain species
have certain strongholds or
certain refuge areas that
are essential to them.
They're telling us something
from their experience, which
we should easily recognize.
But for some reason, we
find it very difficult,
and I think it's very
important to have that message.
And they're the
ones that are going
to know these particular
areas in the forest that
will be important for the
long-term survival of species.
So I think we have much
to learn from them.
[WAVES LAPPING AT THE SHORE]
[HEART BEATING]
>> The final estuary, the
final place to lay the thread,
Cienega Grande,
the great lagoon.
[HEART BEATING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
I think this really
illustrates the Kogi
concept of threads
between different parts
of this ecosystem.
[CARS DRIVING BY]
[OMINOUS MUSIC PLAYING]
[BIRDS CHIRPING AND INSECTS
BUZZING]
[KNOCKING]
[INSECTS BUZZING]
[ENGINES RUMBLING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Gold--
>> Gold does not decay.
>> Does not decay.
[MAN CHANTING]
>> Esuamas were dressed in gold.
>> Dressed in gold.
Now, it is wealth.
>> Now, it is wealth.
>> Now, it is wealth--
>> And has all been--
>> And has all been plundered.
This was the material bridge
to life, vitalizing the water.
These esuamas are stripped.
The water dries out.
>> The water dries out.
>> How will we live?
>> I thought the journey
was over, but now,
the mamas took over the filming,
simply saying that without
hope, all this
would be pointless.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> I thought this was the mamas'
journey and I would film what
happened to them.
But in fact they were
taking me on a journey.
They see a possibility
of hope if we listen.
[WATER FLOWING DOWN RIVER]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
[WATER SPLASHING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[ALAN LAUGHING]
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]